>> Sreenivasan: ON THIS EDITION
FOR SUNDAY AUGUST 24...
AN AMERICAN HOSTAGE HAS BEEN
RELEASED IN SYRIA.
ISIS GAINS STRENGTH AND CONTROL
IN IRAQ AND SYRIA, WHILE THE
WHITE HOUSE WEIGHS MILITARY
OPTIONS.
THE STRONGEST EARTHQUAKE IN 25
YEARS SHAKES NORTHERN
CALIFORNIA.
AND IN OUR SIGNATURE SEGMENT,
FROM THE PHILIPPINES: WILL A
NEW REPRODUCTIVE HEALTHCARE LAW
SLOW DOWN ONE OF ASIA'S HIGHEST
BIRTH RATES?
NEXT, ON PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND.
>>FROM THE TISCH WNET STUDIOS
IN LINCOLN CENTER IN NEW YORK,
HARI SREENIVASAN.
>> Sreenivasan: GOOD EVENING,
THANKS FOR JOINING US.
A MAJOR EARTHQUAKE REGISTERING
6.0 STRUCK NORTHERN CALIFORNIA
OVERNIGHT.
MORE THAN 120 PATIENTS WERE
TREATED WITH QUAKE RELATED
INJURIES AT A LOCAL HOSPITAL,
MANY FROM HEART ATTACKS AND AS
MANY AS HALF DOZEN WITH CRITICAL
INJURIES.
THE QUAKE ALSO LEFT AT LEAST 16
BUILDINGS UNINHABITABLE AND
POWER OUTAGES THROUGHOUT NAPA
COUNTY.
IT WAS THE STRONGEST IN THE BAY
AREA IN THE PAST 25 YEARS.
THE EPICENTER WAS APPROXIMATELY
TEN MILES SOUTH OF AMERICAN
CANYON.
GOVERNOR JERRY BROWN DECLARED A
STATE OF EMERGENCY FOR SOUTHERN
NAPA.
EMERGENCY CREWS ARE WORKING TO
RESTORE POWER TO THOUSANDS OF
HOMES AND LOOKING FOR ANY
NATURAL GAS LEAKS.
HISTORIC BUILDINGS IN DOWNTOWN
NAPA WERE DAMAGED AND OFFICIALS
SAID THERE WERE MORE THAN 60
WATER MAIN BREAKS IN THE AREA.
>> Sreenivasan: IN SYRIA TODAY,
WORD AN AMERICAN HELD HOSTAGE
FOR TWO YEARS HAS BEEN
RELEASED. U.S. GOVERNMENT
OFFICIALS HAVE CONFIRMED THAT
PETER THEO CURTIS WAS HELD BY
AN AL QAEDA LINKED GROUP IN
SYRIA AFTER BEING KIDNAPPED IN
TURKEY IN 2012.
SECRETARY OF STATE JOHN
KERRY SAID THE U.S. IS USING
EVERY DIPLOMATIC TOOL TO SECURE
THE RELEASE OF OTHER AMERICAN
HOSTAGES IN SYRIA.
ALSO TODAY THE ISLAMIC MILITANT
GROUP ISIS CONTINUED ITS
GAINS AGAINST THE SYRIAN
GOVERNMENT.
CELEBRATING THE TAKEOVER OF THE
TABQA AIRBASE IN NORTHEASTERN
SYRIA, THE GOVERNMENT'S LAST
STRONGHOLD IN THE AREA.
IRAQ'S FOREIGN MINISTER CALLED
FOR INTERNATIONAL HELP IN ITS
BATTLE AGAINST ISIS.
LAWMAKERS HERE CONTINUE TO
EXPRESS OUTRAGE OVER THE
EXECUTION OF AN AMERICAN
JOURNALIST, SAYING THE GROUP
COULD HAVE THE ABILITY TO ATTACK
INSIDE THE U.S.
>> THEY'VE EXPRESSED A WILL TO
HIT THE HOME LAND.
THAT'S PART OF THEIR AGENDA
TO DRIVE US OUT OF THE MIDEAST.
IF OUR GROUND FORCES TELL US
THAT WE NEED FORCES TO DEFEAT
ISIL, SO BE IT.
>> Sreenivasan: DEMOCRATIC
SENATOR JACK REED URGED CAUTION.
>> WE HAVE TO BEGIN WITH THE
PRESUMPTION THAT THERE COULD BE
SUCH A THREAT BUT TO JUMP FROM
WHAT THEY'VE DONE WHICH IS
HORRIFIC PARTICULARLY THE
MURDER OF MR. FOLEY TO THE
ASSUMPTION THAT THEY'RE GOING TO
BE AN IMMEDIATE AND WITHIN DAYS
THREAT TO US HERE IN OUR HOME
LAND I THINK YOU DON'T JUMP TO
THAT ASSUMPTION.
>> BRITAIN'S AMBASSADOR TO THE
UNITED STATES SAYS HIS COUNTRY
IS CLOSE TO IDENTIFYING THE MAN
SEEN ON THE VIDEO AT JAMES
FOLEY'S EXECUTION.
>> THERE ARE SOPHISTICATED VOICE
TECHNOLOGIES TO BE SURE WHO THIS
PERSON IS BEFORE VERY LONG.
>> Sreenivasan: AND THIS
AFTERNOON, A MASS TO HONOR THE
SLAIN JOURNALIST WAS HELD IN HIS
HOME TOWN OF ROCHESTER, NEW
HAMPSHIRE.
JOINING US FROM WASHINGTON IS
IS FROM THE WALL STREET JOURNAL.
IT SEEMS TO BE PACE OF CHANGE
HERE IN THE U.S. ATTITUDE AND
INVOLVEMENT IN SYRIA OR IN AIR
STRIKES HAS CHANGED DRAMATICALLY
JUST IN THE LAST 24 OR 36 HOURS.
>> YES, THERE'S NO QUESTION THAT
THE BEHEADING OF JAMES FOLEY
CHANGED THE CALCULUS FOR THE
ADMINISTRATION HERE AND THE
RHETORIC RAMPED UP ALMOST
IMMEDIATELY.
YOU HEARD SECRETARY OF STATE
KERRY SAID THEY'RE WICKEDNESS
THAT HAS TO BE DESTROYED.
THE PENTAGON IS ESCALATING ITS
EFFORTS TO IDENTIFY TARGETS
INSIDE SYRIA.
THEY'RE LOOKING AT EXPANDING THE
AIR CAMPAIGN IN IRAQ.
I THINK MILITARILY, THEY COULD
EXPAND THIS FAIRLY QUICKLY.
I THINK WHAT WE NEED TO SEE IN
THE COMING WEEK IS WHETHER
THERE'S A POLITICAL WILL TO MOVE
IN THIS DIRECTION, AND YOU'LL
PROBABLY REMEMBER IT WAS A YEAR
AGO THAT WE WERE HAVING A
SIMILAR CONVERSATION AFTER
PRESIDENT ASSAD WAS ACCUSED OF
THE CHEMICAL WEAPONS ATTACK THAT
KILLED THOUSANDS OF PEOPLE AND
PRESIDENT OBAMA WAS ASKING FOR
AIR STRIKES IN SYRIA THEN AS
WELL.
>> WHETHER OR NOT THE ISLAMIC
STATE IS A THREAT TO THE HOME
LAND.
>> YES.
WELL AND THERE'S NO QUESTION
THEY'RE A GROWING THREAT TO
AMERICANS.
FROM THE ISLAMIC STATE'S
PERSPECTIVE, THEY'RE SAYING THAT
THE AIR STRIKES IN IRAQ THAT
PRESIDENT OBAMA AUTHORIZED ARE
AN ATTACK ON THEM.
AND NOW THEY'RE TURNING THEIR
FOCUS ON US.
NOW, THE QUESTION IS ARE THEY A
THREAT TO THE CONTINENTAL UNITED
STATES AND THAT'S VERY MUCH OPEN
FOR DEBATE.
MARTIN DEMPSEY, THE TOP GENERAL
FOR AMERICA, SAID RECENTLY AS
THIS WEEK THAT HE BELIEVES THEY
ARE A REGIONAL THREAT, THAT
THEY'RE A THREAT TO THE REGION
BUT THAT THEY COULDN'T STAGE ANY
KIND OF 9/11 TYPE ATTACK ON THE
UNITED STATES.
AS YOU'LL HEAR A LOT OF PEOPLE
SAY, THE ENEMY HAS A VOTE ON
THIS AND THEY'RE CLEARLY TURNING
THEIR FOCUS ON US AND WE DON'T
KNOW WHAT THAT MEANS.
THE BIGGEST CONCERN IS THESE
FOREIGN FIGHTERS LIKE THE MAN
WHO APPARENTLY BEHEADED JAMES
FOLEY WHO HAD A BRITISH ACCENT
AND TIES TO ENGLAND.
WHETHER THOSE COULD COME BACK IN
ONES OR TWOS OR THREES AND
ATTACK.
>> WOULD THAT BE A DECLARATION
OF WAR?
>> YES, WELL THIS IS THE DEBATE
I THINK WE'LL HAVE TO SEE PLAY
OUT THIS WEEK AND I THINK THE
ADMINISTRATION IS TRYING TO
FIGURE OUT WHAT THEIR RATIONALE
WOULD BE.
THE INITIAL SIGNALS FROM THE
ADMINISTRATION MIGHT BE THAT
THEY USE THE BROUGHT SELF
DEFENSE ARGUMENT THAT THEY WOULD
BE ATTACKING ISLAMIC STATE
FIGHTERS THAT THEY BELIEVE ARE
AN IMMINENT THREAT TO AMERICANS.
BUT THERE ARE THOSE IN CONGRESS
THAT BELIEVE THAT THE PRESIDENT
CAN AND SHOULD COME TO THEM FOR
SUPPORT FOR AUTHORIZATION FOR A
BROADER WAR, AND THE PRESIDENT
HIMSELF HAS INDICATED THAT HE'S
WILLING TO DO THIS AND HAS
THOUGHT ABOUT DOING IT THIS IS
PAST -- IT IN THE PAST.
WE HAVE SEEN HIM CHANGE HIS
THINKING ON THIS IN THE PAST AND
WE DON'T KNOW EXACTLY WHERE THEY
WILL COME DOWN.
>> ALL RIGHT, DION NISSENBAUM
FROM THE WALL STREET JOURNAL,
THANK YOU SO MUCH.
>> THANK YOU.
>> Sreenivasan: AT LEAST SEVEN
PEOPLE WERE REPORTEDLY KILLED
TODAY IN GAZA, AS ISRAELI AIR
STRIKES CONTINUED IN THE REGION
AND GAZA MILITANTS FIRED ROCKETS
INTO ISRAEL.
A SEVEN-STORY OFFICE BUILDING
WAS HIT IN GAZA AND A 12-STORY
APARTMENT TOWER WAS LEVELED
YESTERDAY, INJURING UP TO 30
PEOPLE.
ISRAELI PRIME MINISTER BENJAMIN
NETANYAHU HAS WARNED GAZANS TO
LEAVE ANY STRUCTURE USED BY
HAMAS AS THEY ARE ALL CONSIDERED
TARGETS.
PEACE TALKS BETWEEN THE
PALESTINIANS AND ISRAEL
COLLAPSED LAST WEEK.
ITALY HAS RESCUED MORE THAN
3,000 MIGRANTS AT SEA THIS
WEEKEND AND THE ITALIAN NAVY HAS
RECOVERED AT LEAST 19 CORPSES
FROM THE MEDITERRANEAN SEA SINCE
FRIDAY.
THOUSANDS OF MIGRANTS MAKE THE
TREACHEROUS AND OFTEN DEADLY
TRIP FROM NORTH AFRICA TO EUROPE
EACH YEAR.
THE BREAKDOWN OF ORDER IN LIBYA
HAS LED TO AN INCREASE IN
ATTEMPTED CROSSINGS.
ON FRIDAY A BOAT CARRYING UP TO
200 PEOPLE CAPSIZED OFF THE
COAST OF LIBYA.
UKRAINE CELEBRATED ITS
INDEPENDENCE DAY TODAY WITH A
MILITARY PARADE DISPLAYING ROWS
OF SOLDIERS AND ARMORED
VEHICLES.
PRO-RUSSIAN REBELS COUNTERED
WITH A PARADE OF THEIR OWN,
MARCHING CAPTURED UKRAINIAN
SOLDIERS THROUGH DONETSK.
DESPITE THE TENSIONS, ATTEMPTS
AT FINDING A RESOLUTION
CONTINUE-- GERMAN CHANCELLOR
ANGELA MERKEL WAS IN KIEV
YESTERDAY TO MEET WITH UKRAINIAN
PRESIDENT PETRO POROSHENKO AND
CALLED FOR A TWO-SIDED
CEASEFIRE.
AND RUSSIAN PRESIDENT VLADIMIR
PUTIN WILL MEET WITH POROSHENKO
ON TUESDAY.
NOW TO OUR SIGNATURE SEGMENT.
LAST MONTH WE BROUGHT YOU A
STORY FROM THE PHILIPPINES ABOUT
THE SLOW AND OFTEN FRUSTRATING
RECOVERY FOLLOWING THE DEADLIEST
TYPHOON ON RECORD.
TONIGHT, ANOTHER STORY FROM
THERE, A NATION WITH A
POPULATION OF MORE THAN 100
MILLION THAT IS GROWING
INCREASINGLY CONCERNED OVER HOW
TO CARE FOR ITS PEOPLE.
WITH ONE OF THE HIGHEST BIRTH
RATES IN ASIA, SOME THERE ARE
HOPING THAT THE RECENT PASSAGE
OF A CONTROVERSIAL REPRODUCTIVE
HEALTH ACT WILL SLOW POPULATION
GROWTH.
SPECIAL CORRESPONDENT MARK LITKE
REPORTS.
>> Reporter: IT'S 8:00 A.M. AT
THE JOSE FAVELLA HOSPITAL IN THE
PHILIPPINE CAPITAL, MANILA.
IN THE PAST 12 HOURS THERE HAVE
BEEN ABOUT 40 BIRTHS, A FAIRLY
AVERAGE NIGHT FOR ONE OF THE
WORLD'S BUSIEST MATERNITY WARDS.
>> AS YOU CAN SEE, THERE'S MORE
PATIENTS THAN THERE ARE
RESOURCES FOR THEM.
>> Reporter: DR. SILVIA DE LA
PAZ, THE CHIEF OBSTETRICIAN
HERE, SAYS THEY MANAGE THE CRUSH
AS BEST THEY CAN, OFTEN PUTTING
TWO BEDS TOGETHER AS A TANDEM
BED FOR FOUR MOTHERS AND FOUR
NEWBORNS.
AND FROM THESE OVERCROWDED
HOSPITAL WARDS, OUT INTO THE
TEEMING SLUMS OF THE CITY, IT'S
EASY TO SEE THIS COUNTRY IS IN
THE MIDST OF A POPULATION
EXPLOSION, WHAT SOME ARE CALLING
A CRISIS.
THE PHILIPPINES TODAY HAS ONE OF
THE HIGHEST BIRTH RATES IN ASIA
WITH A POPULATION THAT HAS MORE
THAN DOUBLED OVER THE LAST THREE
DECADES FROM 45 MILLION TO 100
MILLION.
ONCE THE MOTHERS AND THEIR
NEWBORNS LEAVE THE MATERNITY
HOSPITAL, MANY ARE GOING TO
RETURN TO PLACES LIKE TONDO,
THIS GRITTY NEIGHBORHOOD RIGHT
ON THE EDGE OF MANILA.
IT'S A PLACE WHERE FAMILIES
STRUGGLE TO GET BY ON ONE OR TWO
DOLLARS A DAY AT BEST.
HERE VERY YOUNG CHILDREN
SCAVENGE THROUGH GARBAGE IN
SEARCH OF SOMETHING TO SELL FOR
A FEW DOLLARS TO HELP SUPPORT
THEIR FAMILIES.
FAMILIES IN ASIA'S MOST CATHOLIC
COUNTRY THAT HAVE HAD LITTLE OR
NO ACCESS TO CONTRACEPTION OR
FAMILY PLANNING ADVICE--
FAMILIES THAT OFTEN GET LARGER
BY THE YEAR.
VILMA LOPEZ HAS TEN CHILDREN,
AGES ONE TO 20.
SHE HAD HER FIRST CHILD AT 19.
>> WE DIDN'T PLAN IT, IT JUST
HAPPENED EVERY YEAR.
IT'S JUST EASY FOR ME TO GET
PREGNANT.
>> Reporter: MANILA IS NOW ONE
OF THE MOST DENSELY POPULATED
URBAN AREA ON EARTH-- SO
CONGESTED, SOME ARE FORCED TO
SEEK REFUGE IN LOCAL CEMETERIES,
WHERE THEY EAT AND SLEEP ON
TOMBS AND MAUSOLEUMS.
>> IN THE PHILIPPINES, THERE IS
FAMILY PLANNING, BUT IT IS
AVAILABLE ONLY TO THE RICH, TO
THOSE WHO ARE ABLE TO AFFORD TO
GO SEE DOCTORS, TO BUY PILLS.
>> Reporter: ESPERANZA CABRAL, A
FORMER HEALTH SECRETARY OF THE
PHILIPPINES, HAS BEEN SOUNDING
THE ALARM ON THE POPULATION
CRISIS HERE, A POPULATION
GROWING FASTEST AMONG THE
POOREST FILIPINOS, THOSE WHOSE
NEED FOR BIRTH CONTROL IS THE
GREATEST.
>> FOR THE POOR AMONG US, IT IS
OFTEN AN ASPIRATION, SOMETHING
THEY WANT TO DO BUT ARE NOT ABLE
TO DO.
>> Reporter: DR. SILVIA DE LA
PAZ SAYS TEEN PREGNANCIES ARE AT
AN ALL-TIME HIGH.
>> WITH THE LACK OF
CONTRACEPTIVES, SO WHAT ELSE
WILL THEY DO?
HAVE BABIES-- MORE AND MORE
BABIES, YOU KNOW.
SO IT'S A SAD PICTURE.
>> Reporter: FOR YEARS THE U.N.
HAS URGED THE PHILIPPINE
GOVERNMENT TO TAKE ACTION, TO
PROVIDE FREE CONTRACEPTION AND
FAMILY PLANNING FOR THE POOR.
RECENT SURVEYS INDICATE EIGHT IN
TEN FILIPINOS NOW AGREE.
BUT THE PHILIPPINES' MOST
POWERFUL INSTITUTION, THE ROMAN
CATHOLIC CHURCH, HAS FOUGHT
FAMILY PLANNING POLICIES EVERY
TIME THEY ARE RAISED.
IN A COUNTRY WHERE MORE THAN 80%
ARE PRACTICING CATHOLICS, THE
CHURCH HAS DOMINATED NEARLY
EVERY ASPECT OF LIFE IN THE
PHILIPPINES FOR MORE THAN 400
YEARS, IT'S MORAL AUTHORITY AND
POLITICAL POWER RARELY
CHALLENGED, ESPECIALLY WHEN IT
COMES TO REPRODUCTION.
ABORTION HERE IS STRICTLY
ILLEGAL ALTHOUGH RARE EXCEPTIONS
ARE MADE IF THE HEALTH OF THE
MOTHER IS AT RISK.
OUTSIDE THE VATICAN IT IS THE
ONLY COUNTRY IN THE WORLD WHERE
DIVORCE IS STILL NOT ALLOWED.
AND WHILE THE PHILIPPINE CHURCH
SAYS IT IS NOT OPPOSED TO
NATURAL FAMILY PLANNING--
AVOIDING INTERCOURSE WHEN A
WOMAN IS MOST FERTILE-- IT
REMAINS OPPOSED TO ALL FORMS OF
ARTIFICIAL CONTRACEPTION.
CONTRACEPTION IN THE EYES OF THE
CHURCH IS STILL IMMORAL?
>> YES.
>> Reporter: YOU DO BELIEVE IT
LEADS TO PROMISCUITY AMONG OTHER
THINGS?
>> YES.
>> Reporter: IF THE PEOPLE OF
THE PHILIPPINES ARE IN SUPPORT
OF POPULATION CONTROL AND
CONTRACEPTION, AND THEY WANT
THEIR CHILDREN TO LEARN IN
SCHOOL PROPER FAMILY PLANNING
EDUCATION, WHY WOULD THE CHURCH
OPPOSE ANY OF THAT?
>> THE CHURCH PROMOTES
PARENTHOOD.
ONLY LET IT BE RESPONSIBLE
THE CHURCH HAS NEVER SAID, "GO
AHEAD, MULTIPLY AS MUCH AS YOU
LIKE OR THAT... AND LET THE GOOD
LORD PROVIDE."
NO, NO, NO, NO, NO.
THE CHURCH PREACHES RESPONSIBLE
PARENTHOOD THROUGH NATURAL
FAMILY PLANNING.
>> Reporter: BUT CHANGES ARE NOW
UNDERWAY IN THE PHILIPPINES THAT
COULD HELP SLOW THE POPULATION
BOOM.
THIS PAST SPRING, AFTER A 15-
YEAR BATTLE THAT WENT ALL THE
WAY TO THE FILIPINO SUPREME
COURT, A NEW REPRODUCTIVE
HEALTHCARE LAW TOOK EFFECT.
IT REQUIRES THE PHILIPPINE
GOVERNMENT TO FUND FAMILY
PLANNING HEALTH CLINICS, PROVIDE
AFFORDABLE CONTRACEPTION, AND
LAUNCH COMPREHENSIVE SEX
EDUCATION IN SCHOOLS.
FORMER HEALTH SECRETARY CABRAL,
ONE OF THE MOST PROMINENT
SUPPORTERS OF THE NEW LAW, SAYS
IT'S ABOUT TIME.
>> IT'S A VICTORY FOR ALL
FILIPINOS, ESPECIALLY WOMEN AND
CHILDREN.
THE LAW CAN MAKE A VERY BIG DENT
IN OUR PROBLEM WITH POVERTY AND
POPULATION.
>> Reporter: SO IS THIS A DEFEAT
FOR THE CATHOLIC CHURCH?
>> I THINK SO.
>> Reporter: THE FIGHT WENT ON
FOR 15 YEARS AND, WITH ALL DUE
RESPECT, ARCHBISHOP, THE CHURCH
LOST.
>> YES, YES-- WHAT'S NEW?
THE CHURCH TEACHES, THE WORLD
DOES NOT LISTEN.
IF THE CHURCH TEACHES AND THE
WORLD LISTENS, THAT WOULD BE A
FIRST-CLASS MIRACLE.
>> Reporter: BUT BEFORE THE BILL
WAS IMPLEMENTED, THE CHURCH AND
ITS SUPPORTERS WON SOME MAJOR
CONCESSIONS FROM SUPREME COURT,
EFFECTIVELY DILUTING THE LAW:
PRIVATE HOSPITALS OWNED BY
RELIGIOUS INSTITUTIONS WILL NOT
HAVE TO PROVIDE FAMILY PLANNING
OPTIONS OR EVEN REFER PATIENTS
TO HOSPITALS THAT WILL PROVIDE
THE SERVICES.
MINORS SEEKING BIRTH CONTROL
PILLS OR CONDOMS WILL REQUIRE
PARENTAL CONSENT.
AND MARRIED WOMEN WILL HAVE TO
HAVE THEIR HUSBANDS CONSENT IF
THEY WANT TO UNDERGO A FERTILITY
PROCEDURE LIKE INSERTING AN IUD.
>> OUR MAIN CONCERN IS THAT
WE'RE LOOKING AT WOMEN AND YOUNG
GIRLS HAVE THE RIGHT TO CHOOSE,
YOU KNOW, FREELY AND
RESPONSIBLY, THE NUMBER OF
CHILDREN THEY WANT AND WHEN THEY
WANT THEM.
>> Reporter: KLAUS BECK IS THE
HEAD OF THE UNITED NATIONS
POPULATION FUND IN THE
PHILIPPINES.
WHILE HE CHEERS THE PASSAGE OF
THE REPRODUCTIVE HEALTH CARE LAW
HERE, HE SAYS THAT FOR THE LAW
TO BE EFFECTIVE IT MUST EMPOWER
WOMEN TO MAKE THEIR OWN CHOICES,
WHICH THE CURRENT LAW NOW
LIMITS.
WITHOUT THOSE CHOICES MANY WOMEN
MAY STILL FEEL THE NEED TO SEEK
OUT ABORTIONS.
HERE IN MANILA, THAT MEANS A
VISIT TO WHAT COULD BE DESCRIBED
AS AN ABORTION BLACK MARKET,
RIGHT OUTSIDE THE 400-YEAR-OLD
CHURCH OF THE BLACK NAZARENE.
RIGHT ALONGSIDE THE ROSARY BEADS
AND STATUES OF SAINTS,
SHOPKEEPERS OPENLY OFFER A
VARIETY OF HERBS AND POTIONS,
PROMISING TO INDUCE MENSTRUATION
AS A WAY TO END UNWANTED
PREGNANCIES.
FOR THE EQUIVALENT OF FIVE
DOLLARS, WE WERE ABLE TO BUY
THIS CONCOCTION-- WHAT THE
VENDOR DESCRIBED AS AN HERBAL
REMEDY, A BREW THAT'S SUPPOSED
INDUCE MISCARRIAGES IN THE FIRST
TRIMESTER OF PREGNANCY.
OTHERS MAY FIND IT NECESSARY TO
FIND SOMEONE IN THESE BACK
ALLEYS TO PERFORM AN ABORTION.
WE MET UP WITH A WOMAN CALLED
ROSE WHO DID NOT WANT TO BE
IDENTIFIED ON CAMERA.
ROSE SAYS SHE HAS ASSISTED
DOCTORS PERFORMING HUNDREDS OF
ABORTIONS.
>> EVERY DAY WE HAD THREE TO
FIVE PATIENTS, BECAUSE IT WOULD
ONLY TAKE 15 MINUTES FOR EACH
PROCEDURE.
>> Reporter: ACCORDING TO THE
CENTER FOR REPRODUCTIVE RIGHTS
THERE ARE MORE THAN 500,000
ILLEGAL ABORTIONS IN THE
PHILIPPINES EVERY YEAR.
AN ESTIMATED 1,000 WOMEN DIE
EVERY YEAR OF COMPLICATIONS FROM
THOSE PROCEDURES.
WHILE THE LIMITATIONS OF THE NEW
REPRODUCTIVE HEALTH CARE LAW ARE
CLEAR, FORMER HEALTH SECRETARY
CABRAL IS OPTIMISTIC THAT IT
WILL EVENTUALLY LOWER THE NUMBER
OF UNWANTED PREGNANCIES AND
EVENTUALLY SLOW THE POPULATION
GROWTH.
>> EVEN THOUGH THE PRAGMATIC
PURPOSE OF THE BILL IS NOT
POPULATION CONTROL, AS WE KNOW
FROM OTHER COUNTRIES, IF YOU
GIVE MOTHERS A CHANCE, WHAT
ACTUALLY HAPPENS IS THE
POPULATION RATES GO DOWN.
>> Reporter: FOR CABRAL AND MANY
OTHERS IN THE PHILIPPINES,
FAILURE IS NOT AN OPTION.
THE NEED TO CONTROL THIS
COUNTRY'S POPULATION GROWTH IS
BECOMING A MATTER OF SURVIVAL
FOR FILIPINOS TODAY-- A MATTER
OF SURVIVAL FROM THE CRADLE TO
THOSE GRAVEYARDS, WHERE PEOPLE
ARE NOW LIVING AS SQUATTERS,
BECAUSE THEY HAVE NOWHERE ELSE
TO LIVE.
>> Sreenivasan: SEE MORE FROM
ONE OF THE WORLD'S BUSIEST
MATERNITY WARDS IN THE
PHILIPPINES.
VISIT NEWSHOUR.PBS.ORG.
AS WE REPORTED YESTERDAY, THERE
ARE NOW ARE MORE THAN 2,6OO
CONFIRMED OR SUSPECTED CASES OF
EBOLA AND MORE THAN 1,400 DEATHS
RESULTING FROM THE VIRUS.
ALL OF THE CASES HAVE ORIGINATED
IN WEST AFRICA.
FOR THE LATEST ON THE HEALTH
CRISIS WE ARE JOINED VIA SKYPE
FROM ACCRA GHANA BY DREW HINSHAW
OF THE WALL STREET JOURNAL.
>> WE SAW SOME DISTURBING IMAGES
OUT OF OF LIBERIA AND
NEIGHBORHOOD HERE, PEOPLE WERE
STARTING TO FIGHT BACK AGAINST
THE POLICE.
HAVE TENSIONS EASED?
>> Reporter: TENSIONS RIGHT NOW
ARE A LITTLE BIT EASIER THAN
THEY WERE A WHILE AGO BUT THE
FUNDAMENTAL PROBLEM IN LIBERIA,
ONE IS REALLY ONE OF GOVERNMENT
MISTRUST IS STILL THERE.
THIS IS A COUNTRY THAT FOUGHT A
14 YEAR CIVIL WAR ONE OF THE
MOST HORRIFIC IN MODERN MEMORY.
THERE IS A REAL GULF BETWEEN THE
GOVERNED AND THE GOVERNMENT AND
THE FUNDAMENTAL PROBLEM WHICH IS
THAT PEOPLE THINK THAT EBOLA IS
A CONSPIRACY OR A GOVERNMENT
STARTED RUMOR IS STILL THERE.
AND RIGHT, WHILE THERE IS NOT A
CLASS RIGHT NOW THERE IS A REAL
PROBABLY THAT THERE WILL BE MORE
IN DAYS TO COME ESPECIALLY AS
PEOPLE GET HUNGRY IN THE
QUARANTINED NEIGHBORHOOD.
>> THE FEAR SPREADS FASTER THAN
THE VIRUS TO DOES.
>> WHEN PEOPLE PANIC, THEY START
DISBELIEVING PEOPLE THEY HAVE
BELIEVED ALL THEIR LIVES, THEIR
COMMUNITY LEADERS, HEALERS AND A
COMMUNITY LEADER, DOESN'T HAVE
AS MUCH SWAY WHEN THIS POPS UP
IN THEIR NEIGHBORHOOD.
>> DAVID, DO THE NEIGHBORS THERE
HAVE A PLAN ESTABLISHED FOR IT,
ARE THEY CALLING FOR OUTSIDE
ASSISTANCE?
>> THEY ARE THE FIRST TO TELL
YOU THEY ARE MAKING THIS UP AS
THEY GO ALONG.
I THINK WHAT HAPPENED WAS IN
APRIL THERE WAS A DIP AND
EVERYONE THOUGHT OKAY THIS VIRUS
HAS BURNED OUT.
THEN IT SWAMPED THESE
GOVERNMENTS IN JUNE AND JULY.
WHAT YOU'RE SUPPOSED TO DO IS
TRACE PERSON TO PERSON.
IF I HAVE IT WHO HAVE I TOUCHED
WHILE CONTAGIOUS.
YOU MONITOR THAT, YOU MONITOR
WHO THEY TOUCH WHEN THEY'RE
CONTAGIOUS.
WE'RE WAY PAST THAT POINT WHERE
LIBERIA AND SIERRA LEONE CAN DO
THAT.
>> GOING IN AND OUT OF LIBERIA,
THE HEALTH CARE WORKERS THEIR
STORIES ARE EVEN MORE
COMPELLING.
DOCTORS IN NIGERIA WERE TRYING
TO STRIKE OUT OF SOME FEAR AND
CONCERN FOR THEMSELVES SO IN
POPULATIONS LIKE SIERRA LEONE
AND LIBERIA, WHO IS THERE TO
CARE FOR THESE PATIENTS?
>> EXACTLY.
DOCTORS WERE ON STRIKE BEFORE
EBOLA GOT THERE, OVER ANOTHER
ISSUE.
IN LIBERIA AND SIERRA LEO THEY
DIDN'T HAVE RUBBER GLOVES.
MEDICINES SANS FRONTIERS, THINGS
LIKE THAT YOU GET SO MANY AID
GROUPS, LOGJAM AT THE AIRPORT.
WHEN YOU RUN AT THE MONROVIA
AIRPORT, A COUNTRY THAT HAS BEEN
ABANDONED BY AID GROUPS, THAT
HAVE LONG STANDING RELATIONSHIPS
WITH LIBERIA.
>> DREW HINSHAW, JOINING US VIA
SKYPE IN ACCRA, GHANA, THANK YOU
VERY MUCH.
>> THANK YOU.
>> Sreenivasan: STARTING
TOMORROW, THE NEWSHOUR BEGINS A
WEEK-LONG LOOK AT THOSE WHO ARE
RETHINKING COLLEGE TO MAKE IT
MORE ACCESSIBLE AND AFFORDABLE
IN AN UNCERTAIN JOB MARKET.
HERE'S AN EXCERPT FROM ONE OF
THE REPORTS, ABOUT A UNIVERSITY
PROGRAM WITH NO CREDIT HOURS, NO
PROFESSORS, AND NO CLASSES.
>> FOR MORE THAN A CENTURY,
HIGHER EDUCATION HAS RELIED ON
THE CREDIT HOUR.
STUDENTS EARN CREDIT FOR HOURS
SPENT IN CLASS.
IN TURN, CREDITS ADD UP TO A
COLLEGE DEGREE.
>> UNDER A TRADITIONAL COMMON
LAW DEFINITION...
>> AND WHILE THE CREDIT HOUR IS
STILL THE MAINSTAY AT SOUTHERN
NEW HAMPSHIRE UNIVERSITY, A
PRIVATE INSTITUTION OF 17,000
STUDENTS, QUESTIONS THE VERY
VALUE OF THE COLLEGE CLASSROOM.
PRESIDENT PALMER BLANK, SAYS THE
NATION INVESTS TOO OF THE CREDIT
HOUR.
>> WE GIVE FINANCIAL AID EVERY
YEAR BASED ON THE CREDIT HOUR
BUT THE CREDIT HOUR IS REALLY
GOOD AT ONE THING OR PRINCIPAL
THING WHICH IS TELLING PEOPLE
HOW LONG YOU SAT, HOW LONG YOU
WERE IN CLASS.
NOT GOOD AT TELLING PEOPLE WHAT
YOU ACTUALLY LEARNED.
>> LAUNCHING COLLEGE FOR AMERICA
AN ONLINE DEGREE PROGRAM WITH NO
CLASSES NO PROFESSORS AND NO
CREDIT HOURS.
>> RATHER THAN MEASURING HOW
LONG SOMEONE SAT, THE CREDIT
HOUR CONSTRUCT, WE ACTUALLY HAVE
A PROGRAM THAT MEASURES WHAT YOU
LEARN AND WE AT TIMES THROW IT
OUT THE WINDOW.
>> HOW IS IT SIMILAR TO ONLINE
UNIVERSITIES THAT HAVE EXISTED
FOR YEARS NOW?
>> ALMOST ALL ONLINE ARE
UNIVERSITIES, IS BASED ON THE
COURSE.
WE DON'T HAVE CREDIT HOURS OR
COURSE HE BUT WE HAVE 120
COMPETENCIES.
WHAT WE DON'T CARE VERY MUCH
ABOUT IS TIME.
AND THAT IS SUCH A FUNDAMENTAL
REVERSAL OF THE BASIC STRUCTURE
OF HIGHER EDUCATION.
>> BEFORE WE LEAVE YOU TONIGHT,
THE EARTHQUAKE WHICH STRUCK THE
NAPA REGION HAS BEEN UPGRADED TO
6 MUCH 1.
AND EMERGENCY WORKERS ARE TRYING
TO KEEP ELECTRICITY RESTORED.
PETER THEO CURTIS, THE HOSTAGE
TAKEN IN TURKEY IN 2012 AND HELD
IN SYRIA IS FREE.
HE WAS RELEASED EARLIER TODAY
TO U.N. REPRESENTATIVES.
THE FUNERAL OF MICHAEL BROWN THE
UNARMED TEENAGER WHO WAS SHOT BY
DARREN WILSON WILL TAKE PLACE
TOMORROW.
AND LATE WORD, RICHARD
ATTENBOROUGH HAS DIED AT THE AGE
OF 90.
THAT'S IT FOR THIS EDITION OF
NEWSHOUR WEEKEND, THANKS FOR
WATCHING.